29 DBT SELF HELP REMINDERS
Wise mind is that part of each person that can know and experience truth. It is where the person knows something to be true or valid. It is almost always quiet, It has a certain peace. It is where the person knows something in a centered way.
Wise mind is like having a heart, everyone has one, whether they experience it or not.
Wise mind is like a deep well in the ground. The water at the bottom of the well, the entire underground ocean is wise mind. But on the way down there are often trap doors that impede progress. Sometimes the trap doors are so cleverly built that you believe there is no water at the bottom of the well. The trap door may look like the bottom of the well. Perhaps it is locked and you need a key. Perhaps it is nailed shut and you need a hammer, or it is glued shut and you need a chisel.
Trust Yourself. You know what you want and need. (Wise Mind)
Take a day off alone; make a retreat. You can learn from monks and hermits without becoming one. (Observe and Describe)
Talk and play with children. It will bring out the unhurried little person inside you. (Participate)
When you can’t think straight, stop thinking. Feel. (Non-judgmental stance)
When you feel anxious, let yourself know that in your head you’ve moved into the future to something scary and your body has gotten up the energy for it. Come back to the present. (One-mindfully)
Take time just to think. Action is good and necessary, but it’s fruitful only if we muse, ponder and mull. (Effectively)
When you’re angry, let yourself feel the anger. Decide what you want to do: just feel it, express it, or take some action. (The Function of Emotions)
Make time for play - the things you like to do. Whatever your age, your inner child needs re-creation. (Adult Pleasant Activities)
When you’re sad, think about what would be comforting. (ACCEPTS: Pushing Away & Thoughts)
Put yourself first. You can’t be anything for anybody else unless you take care of yourself. (Self Soothe)
When you feel alone, know there are people who want to be with you. Fantasize what it would be like to be with each of them. Decide if you want to make that happen. (IMPROVE: Imagery)
Take time to wonder. Without wonder, life is merely existence. (IMPROVE: Meaning)
Allow yourself time to be lazy and unproductive. Rest isn’t a luxury; it’s a necessity. (IMPROVE: Relaxation)
Notice the sun and the moon as they rise and set. They are remarkable for their steady pattern of movement, not their speed. (IMPROVE: One thing at a time)
Let go. Nothing is usually the hardest thing to do - but ofen it is the best. (Guidelines for Accepting Reality)
When things are in chaos and you are in a frenzy, ask yourself: "What is right about now?" Chances are, you already know what is wrong. (Turning your mind)
Learn to stand back and let others take their turn as leaders. There will always be new opportunities for you to step out in front again. (Radical Acceptance)
When people turn you down, it usally has to do with them and not with you. Ask someone else for what you need. (Using Objective Effectiveness)
When you want to talk to someone new and are scared, breathe. Don’t start rehearsing, just plunge in. If it doesn’t go well, you can stop. (Using Relationship Effectiveness)
When you see someone else’s hurt face, breathe. You are not responsible for making other people happy. (FAST: No apologies)
When you want something from someone else, ask. You’ll be OK if they say no. Asking is being true to yourself. (FAST: Be truthful)
When you’re hurt, tell the person who hurt you. Keeping it inside makes it grow. (Situations for Interpersonal Effectiveness)
The key to success is the practice of DBT skills.
What Skills: Observe, Describe, Participate. (MINDFULNESS)
How Skills: Non-judgmentally, One-mindfully, Effectively. (MINDFULNESS)
DISTRESS TOLERANCE
Using Crisis Survival: Distraction with Wise Mind ACCEPTS. (A)Activities, (C) Contributing, (C) Comparisons, (E) Emotions - use opposite, (P) Pushing Away, (T) Thoughts, (S) Sensations.
